# avocoder
 An interface for tangible voice manipulation 

#Artists’ Statement

Avocoder allows people to manipulate their voices by tangibly varying pitch, volume, and distortion. Modern musical synthesizers come with a myriad of preset patches and filters to manipulate pitch and voice, but through our experience creating patches for an analog synthesizer, we concluded that the abstraction of modern instruments creates complicity in how we interact with musical interfaces. Rather than accepting preset patches, we wanted to give people the chance to explore manipulating parameters of sound themselves in a hands-on manner, allowing them to explore beyond the paradigm of preset patches and microtones. 

We employed an organic process throughout the creation of Avocoder, testing the capacity and limitations of the software (Max/MSP) and hardware (Arduino) we worked with to create an aural experience that is at once interactive and captivating. Combining the acoustic elements of voice with the digital elements of computer software allows people to experience the deconstruction — and reconstruction — of their voice in a unique way. We were inspired by instruments such as the vocoder and analog synthesizer for their tangibility and modularity, and aimed to include a similar level of modularity in our subpatches. We also included the dual-microphone input for people to experience the interplay between two voices.  

Rather than creating a composition with our interface, our intention behind creating Avocoder was to allow each individual to create a meaningful, personal experience through experimentation, much like our creative process. As such, people will hear glitches in the music they create, audio clipping and other unexpected sounds. These DSP “errors” are part of the overall effect, and shouldn’t be considered failures or shortcomings. As Cascone argues in her paper, The Aesthetics of Failure: “Post-Digital” Tendencies in Contemporary Computer Music, “The technique of exposing the minutiae of DSP errors and artifacts for their own sonic value has helped further blur the boundaries of what is to be considered music, but it has also forced us to also to
examine our preconceptions of failure and detritus more carefully.” Avocoder provides examples of such blurred boundaries, and allows users to define sound and music on their own terms.

The technical underpinnings of this project, namely our use of digital signaling processing, stems from concepts presented by Claude Shannon in his paper, The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Avocoder involves a large amount of data and as such, we had to consider the difference between “noise” and “information.” Whether this meant grouping together data or deciding what data was useful, discerning between noise and information was crucial for the functionality of our vocal synthesizer and to not overwhelm the user with our interface. We also took into consideration the three levels of communication that Shannon describes: technical, semantic and effectiveness and focused our efforts on the latter two. 

We hope that people will take away an experience of playing with digital sound and the sound of their own voice in ways they hadn’t before, and that Avocoder encourages them to challenge predefined constraints of modern musical software and instruments. 
